---
layout: news
category: news
date: 2022-04-24
version: 4.5.0
title: Complete rework of async handling and response writing, updates to JavalinVue
summary: The JavalinServlet and JavalinResponseWrapper classes have been completely reworked
---

## New functionality and fixes
* The `JavalinVue` plugin now has support for pre- and post-rendering (thanks to [TareqK](https://github.com/TareqK))
* You can now call `Context#future` in any type of handler (thanks to [@dzikoysk](https://github.com/dzikoysk))
* You can now configure the default future callback via `ContextResolver#defaultFutureCallback`
* The `Context#seekableStream` method now closes the `InputStream`
* Fixed a bug where `Context#seekableStream` claimed to return a range larger than it returned
* Added `Context#cachedSessionAttributeOrCompute` method, to compute absent session attributes
* The `JavalinJackson` implementation now registers a `KtormModule` (if it finds it)

## Improvements to request lifecyle
There exists an [excellent description](https://github.com/tipsy/javalin/pull/1397)
of some of the issues with the previous implementation,
written by [@dzikoysk](https://github.com/dzikoysk). Huge thanks to him for diagnosing
the issue and providing a fix.

To provide a short summary,
Javalin used to store the result the user wished to return to the client either as a
`CompletableFuture` or an `InputStream`. This depended on if you called
`Context#future` or `Context#result`. Calling one of these methods would clear any
value set by the other one, and when it was time to finish the request lifecycle,
Javalin would branch into two ways of writing a response
(async or sync). This could lead to race conditions in certain cases.

The issue was solved by consolidating the two backing fields into a single `CompletableFuture`,
and wrapping it in an `AtomicReference`. This also allowed us to rework the request lifecycle
into a chain of `CompletableFuture` results. This makes previously impossible things possible,
such as calling `Context#future` in all types of handlers (`before`, `after`, `exception`, `error`).

Javalin still runs synchronously if you don't pass it a `CompletableFuture`.
If you pass Javalin a `String` result by calling `ctx.result("My String")`,
Javalin will transform this into _an already completed future_,
and there will be no need to start an async context. There should be no changes to the
existing behavior of Javalin apps. Calling `Context#result` or `Context#future` will now
always close previous streams and cancel previous futures.

It's also worth noting that when you pass a non-completed `CompletableFuture` in, for example,
a `before`, then the request will be lifted out of Jetty's `ThreadPool`, and
the rest of handlers (`http`, `after`, `exception`, `error`) will be appended
to this `CompletableFuture` as a next stage. This means it will be executed in the `ThreadPool`
that was responsible for completion of the original non-completed `CompletableFuture`.

## Improvements to response writing
The `JavalinResponseWrapper` class, which handled compression and response writing has been
completely rewritten. This should fix potential bugs with streams not being closed properly.

