---
layout: news
category: news
date: 2020-01-01
version: 3.7.0
title: Rate limiting, case insensitive matching, and more!
summary: New utils and plugins, and improvements to Context, Javalin/JavalinConfig, OpenAPI, and more.
---

## Rate limiting
A very simple util class for rate limiting has been added.
You can call it in the beginning of your endpoint `Handler` functions:

```kotlin
app.get("/") { ctx ->
    RateLimit(ctx).requestPerTimeUnit(5, TimeUnit.MINUTES) // throws if rate limit is exceeded
    ctx.status("Hello, rate-limited World!")
}
```

Every rate limiter is independent (IP and `Handler` based), so different endpoints can have different rate limits. It works as follows:

* A map of maps holds one IP/counter map per method/path combination (`Handler`).
* On each request the counter for that IP is incremented.
* If the counter exceeds the number of requests specified, an exception is thrown.
* All counters are cleared periodically on every timeunit that you specified.

## Case insensitive path matching
There is a new plugin, `RedirectToLowercasePathPlugin`, which fills the void
left by removing case-insensitive matching that was present in Javalin 2.X.

The plugin redirects requests with uppercase/mixcase paths to lowercase paths.
For example, `/Users/John` redirects to `/users/John` (if endpoint is `/users/:userId`).
It does not affect the casing of path-params and query-params, only static
URL fragments (`Users` becomes `users` above, but `John` remains `John`).\\
When using this plugin, you can only add paths with lowercase URL fragments.

It can be added like any other plugin:

```kotlin
config.registerPlugin(RedirectToLowercasePathPlugin())
```

## Misc new features

* Added a `basicAuthCredentialsExists()` method to `Context` (thanks to [@mikexliu](https://github.com/mikexliu)).
* Added option to specify host (`start(port, host)` overload) to `Javalin` (thanks to [@rbygrave](https://github.com/rbygrave)).
* Added support for dynamic single page handlers (thanks to [@pgross41](https://github.com/pgross41)).
* Added support for `anyOf`/`oneOf` to OpenAPI plugin (thanks to [@sealedtx](https://github.com/sealedtx)).
* Added a `Path` overload to `JavalinVue#rootDirectory` method

## Fixes
* Fixed `Instant` serialization in OpenAPI plugin (thanks to [@TobiasWalle](https://github.com/TobiasWalle)).
* Fixed bug where `endpointHandlerPath()` method would throw if called in after/requestLogger on 404s.
* Fixed bug in `config.enforceSsl` (now takes load balancers into account)
* Fixed bug in content decoding, will now try specified charset instead of always UTF-8 (thanks to [@thibaultmeyer](https://github.com/thibaultmeyer)).
